to understand where to start when you're trying to create a shade from scratch.
It is actually helpful to look at how an image texture is treated in a shader.
So let's take a look at this simple setup. I have an image texture up here,
you might recognize this guy
and a material preview with a plane here.
Now we just add an image texture node and select the image
as you can see. Apart from a couple of options.
The only input is this vector socket, but even if we don't plug anything into it,
the texture is mapped onto the surface.
The reason this works is that it's actually grabbing
the UV map that is generated with a plane.
If I just quickly add another UV map and change it a little bit,
you can see that the UV map that is taken is just the one that is selected as active.
And if I delete both,
the texture does not get mapped at all
because the image texture node needs some coordinates to
be able to map this texture onto the surface.
So let's go back one step and take a look at how this mapping works.
I just go to input UV map
and if I plug it in here
as you can see, the result does not change.
So let's look at the UV map itself.
If you think back to how I've actresses played,
this translates into a two dimensional map of X and Y
values a range from 0 to 1 on each axis.
Accordingly. The red part of the color goes from 0 to 1 on the X axis
and the green part on the y axis.
And if we look at how this is mapped now we
can see that the bottom left corner of the image is
mapped in the position 00 and the top right corner to
the position 11 and everything in between is mapped accordingly.
So let's look more in detail of this coordinate map.
Contrary to the image texture
that shows a clear picks elation.
The coordinate map is a continuous gradient without any steps
and no matter how far you zoom in every surface
point has its own coordinate values assigned to it.
The pics elation happens only when we introduced the image texture
for every surface point
the image texture node looks up the color
of the pixel that corresponds to the position.
So you can think of an image texture as a
look up table where the image texture node takes coordinates,
decides which pixel belongs to that position and then displays the according color
and the smugness of the texture that you can see in the material preview
is caused by the interpolation setting
that is set to linear
as means to soften the pixel asian effect.
You can change this the closest to see the true pixels.
The task of a procedural texture and blender
now is to replace this image texture node
with a function that calculates the color on the spot rather than looking it up.
The difference can be described as the difference
between a look up table and a mathematical function
where the coordinate values are used directly to calculate the texture
instead of looking up the color from the image texture
to be clear.
The term procedural texture does not directly imply that it has to
be This way an image texture can also be created procedurally.
And as a matter of fact the image texture that I've been using here
has also been created procedurally.
As you can see if I zoom in.
I don't get the same exhalation anymore.
The way this works is comparable to vector graphics opposed to pixel graphics.
These high resolutions are not achieved with large file sizes
but by calculating it on the spot.
The note graph in here that generates the
image which might look quite threatening as the first
site holds all the information of how the
shapes are drawn and not the shapes themselves.
But if I zoom in really closely you can see a different type of picks elation here.
If you look closely it is not connected to the same grid
that you would get from an image texture but it's rather curved.
The reason this happens is the technique that I'm using to
generate these shapes and something I will go into later.
But in theory a procedural texture like this can have any level of detail.
Let me just add in a Musgrave texture
that generates a lot of noise
and
if I zoom in
the detail just keeps coming.
Another advantage of procedural textures like this is that they don't repeat over
a larger surface areas like image textures do which gives you tiling artifacts.
The texture coordinates used to generate the texture don't need to be
between zero and one like they do for an image texture.
If I just scale this Musgrave texture however I want there is no repetition.
That can be incredibly useful when shading larger areas or creating a shader.
That should be versatile for several situations.
As a conclusion,
the main takeaway here is that even for
image textures the basis are continuous coordinates and
a procedural texture fills the gap with an algorithm to be generated on the spot.
So there has to be some type of input that the algorithm can use
and this is usually the texture coordinate space but on top of coordinates.
Also, other inputs can be used.
For example you can incorporate the objects geometry
within the shader but we'll go into this later